bandhusnehaṃ vijahyāṃ tava hi karuṇayā tvayyupāveśitātmā
sarvaṃ tyaktvā careyaṃ sakalamapi jagadvīkṣya māyāvilāsam |
nānātvādbhrāntijanyāt sati khalu guṇadoṣāvabodhe vidhirvā
vyāsedho vā kathaṃ tau tvayi nihitamatervītavaiṣamyabuddhe: ||1||
bandhu-snehaṃ vijahyāṃ	to (my) relatives affection (I will) give up
tava hi karuṇayā	by Thy grace alone
tvayi-upāveśita-ātmā	in Thee merged my mind
sarvaṃ tyaktvā careyaṃ	abandoning everything will wander about
sakalam-api jagat-vīkṣya	the whole world looking upon as only
māyā-vilāsam	Maayaa's expression
nānātvāt-bhrāntijanyāt	multiplicity due to false comprehension
sati khalu guṇa-doṣa-	so being, indeed, good and bad
avabodhe vidhi:-vā	its understanding or the does-
vyāsedha: vā kathaṃ tau	and don'ts, how come they both
tvayi nihita-mate:-	into Thee (whose) absorbed is the mind
vīta-vaiṣamya-buddhe:	and transcended the consciousness of differences
Thy grace alone will enable me to abandon my love and affection towards my relatives. With my mind merged in Thee, renouncing everything, I will wander about looking upon the whole world as an expression of Maayaa. The injunctions and prohibitions of the scriptures apply to the one who entertains the concepts of good or bad due to multiplicity caused by false comprehension. How can both of these apply to a person whose mind is absorbed in Thee and who has transcended the consciousness of differences.
kṣuttṛṣṇālopamātre satatakṛtadhiyo jantava: santyanantā-
stebhyo vijñānavattvāt puruṣa iha varastajjanirdurlabhaiva |
tatrāpyātmātmana: syātsuhṛdapi ca ripuryastvayi nyastacetā-
stāpocchitterupāyaṃ smarati sa hi suhṛt svātmavairī tato'nya: ||2||
kṣut-tṛṣṇā-lopa-mātre	hunger and thirst appeasing merely
satata-kṛta-dhiya:	always absorbed whose minds
jantava: santi-anantā:-	(such) beings are there countless
tebhya: vijñānavattvāt	among them, because discriminative mind
puruṣa iha vara:-	man, here, is superior
tat-jani:-durlabha-eva	therefore, this birth is rare indeed
tatra-api-ātmā-ātmana:	there again, one's self to his own self
syāt-suhṛt-api ca ripu:-	may be friend and also an enemy
tvayi nyasta-cetā:-	in Thee (whose) absorbed is mind
tāpa-ucchitte:-upāyaṃ	is sorrows alleviating means
smarati sa hi suhṛt	(those who) think so, he alone is friend
sva-ātma-vairī tata:-anya:	one self's enemy (is) the other one
There are countless beings who are always absorbed in satisfying their hunger and thirst. Among them, a man is superior for being endowed with a discriminative mind. Human birth indeed is rare. Among men also a person may be one's own friend or a foe. A person whose mind is absorbed in Thee, is always concerned in the means of alleviating sorrow, is ones own friend. All others are their own foes.
tvatkāruṇye pravṛtte ka iva nahi gururlokavṛtte'pi bhūman
sarvākrāntāpi bhūmirnahi calati tatassatkṣamāṃ śikṣayeyam |
gṛhṇīyāmīśa tattadviṣayaparicaye'pyaprasaktiṃ samīrāt
vyāptatvañcātmano me gaganaguruvaśādbhātu nirlepatā ca ||3
tvat-kāruṇye pravṛtte	(when) Thy grace operates
ka iva na hi guru:-	who, like, is not also a teacher
loka-vṛtte-api	in this worldly existence also
bhūman	O Lord of the Universe!
sarvākrāntā-api bhūmi:-	oppressed by all also, the earth
na-hi calati	it does not move
tata:-satkṣamāṃ śikṣayeyam	from her true forbearance let me learn
gṛhṇīyām-īśa	May I learn O God!
tat-tat-viṣaya-	(that) from this that objects'
paricaye-api-	contact also
aprasaktiṃ samīrāt-	non-tainting from the air
vyāptatvam-ca-ātmana: me	and all pervasiveness of myself
gagana-guru-vaśāt-	from the sky as a teacher
bhātu nirlepatā ca	be made clear to me and also the unaffectedness
svaccha: syāṃ pāvano'haṃ madhura udakavadvahnivanmā sma gṛhṇāṃ
sarvānnīno'pi doṣaṃ taruṣu tamiva māṃ sarvabhūteṣvaveyām |
puṣṭirnaṣṭi: kalānāṃ śaśina iva tanornātmano'stīti vidyāṃ
toyādivyastamārtāṇḍavadapi ca tanuṣvekatāṃ tvatprasādāt ||4||
svaccha: syāṃ	clean may be
pāvana:-ahaṃ	pure I
madhura udaka-vat-	sweet like water
vahni-vat-mā sma gṛhṇāṃ	like fire may I not take on
sarva-annīna:-api doṣaṃ	consuming all, their defects
taruṣu tam-iva	in the trees, like it (fire)
māṃ sarva-bhūteṣu-aveyām	me alone in all the beings recognising
puṣṭi-naṣṭi: kalānāṃ	waxing and waning of the parts
śaśina:-iva-tano:-	of the moon, like, of the body
na-ātmana:-	and not of the soul
asti-iti vidyāṃ	it is, this knowledge
toya-ādi-vyasta-	water etc., reflecting
mārtāṇḍa-vat-api ca	the sun like also
tanuṣu-ekatāṃ	in all bodies oneness
tvat-prasādāt	by Thy grace
May I be clean pure and sweet like the water. May I be not blemished by taking food of any type, just as fire though all consuming, is unaffected by the defects of any substance. Just as there is fire in every tree, let me recognize me in all beings. The growth and decay is of the body, like waxing and waning of the moon, and not of Aatman, the self. By Thy grace, may I realise, the oneness of all individual bodies, just like the reflected images of the sun in universal waters.
snehādvyādhāttaputrapraṇayamṛtakapotāyito mā sma bhūvaṃ
prāptaṃ prāśnan saheya kṣudhamapi śayuvat sindhuvatsyāmagādha: |
mā paptaṃ yoṣidādau śikhini śalabhavat bhṛṅgavatsārabhāgī
bhūyāsaṃ kintu tadvaddhanacayanavaśānmāhamīśa praṇeśam ||5||
snehāt-vyādha-	because of affection, by the hunter
ātta-putra-praṇaya-	holding offspring attachment
mṛta-kapota-āyita:	was dead the pigeon with them
mā sma bhūvaṃ	may I not be so
prāptaṃ prāśnan saheya	wherever is available, I eat, endure
kṣudham-api śayu-vat	hunger also like a python
sindhu-vat-syām-agādha:	an ocean like may I be serene/deep
mā paptaṃ yoṣit-ādau	may (I) not fall prey to female lust
śikhini śalabha-vat	like fire the moths
bhṛṅga-vat-sāra-bhāgī bhūyāsaṃ	like honey bee may I be a knower of essence
kintu tat-vat-dhana-cayana-	but like it, for accumulating wealth
vaśāt-mā-aham-	by that may I not
īśa praṇeśam	O Lord! Perish
May I not be like the pigeon who for the love of its off springs was killed by the hunter, along with them. Like the python may I eat whatever is available and also endure hunger when nothing is available. Let me be deep and serene like the ocean. Let me not fall a prey to the lust of women like a moth to fire. O Lord! let me seek the essence of things like the honey bee and unlike it let me not perish in accumulating wealth.
mā baddhyāsaṃ taruṇyā gaja iva vaśayā nārjayeyaṃ dhanaughaṃ
hartānyastaṃ hi mādhvīhara iva mṛgavanmā muhaṃ grāmyagītai: |
nātyāsajjeya bhojye jhaṣa iva baliśe piṅgalāvannirāśa:
supyāṃ bhartavyayogāt kurara iva vibho sāmiṣo'nyairna hanyai ||6||
mā baddhyāsaṃ taruṇyā	may I not be led to captivity by women
gaja iva vaśayā	as an elephant is by a female
na-ārjayeyaṃ dhana-aughaṃ	let me not earn wealth in plenty
hartā-anya:-taṃ hi	(because) taken away by others it is
mādhvīhara:-iva	like the honey gatherers
mṛga-vat-mā muhaṃ	like a deer may I not be ensnared
grāmya-gītai:	by vulgar music
na-ati-āsajjeya	not very much attached may I be
bhojye jhaṣa iva baliśe	to food, like a fish to the bait
piṅgalā-vat-nirāśa: supyāṃ	like Pingalaa, without a care, may I sleep
bhartavya-yogāt	guarding needed for
kurara iva vibho	like the Kurara bird, O Lord!
sāmiṣa:-anyai:-na hanyai	carrying meat, by others may I not be killed
Let me not be led to captivity by women as an elephant is by a female. Let me not earn wealth in plenty because it is taken away by others, like the honey gatherers. Let me not be attracted into a snare by sweet words, as a deer is by vulgar music. May I not be too attached to food like a fish is to a bait. Like Pingalaa may I sleep soundly without a care. O Lord! May I not be killed by others like the Kurara bird for having to guard the meat it was carrying.
varteya tyaktamāna: sukhamatiśiśuvannissahāyaścareyaṃ
kanyāyā ekaśeṣo valaya iva vibho varjitānyonyaghoṣa: |
tvaccitto nāvabudhyai paramiṣukṛdiva kṣmābhṛdāyānaghoṣaṃ
geheṣvanyapraṇīteṣvahiriva nivasānyundurormandireṣu ||7||
varteya tyaktamāna:	will live abandoning the sense of honour and dishonour
sukham-ati-śiśu-vat-	very happily like a child
nissahāya:-careyaṃ	alone and unaccompanied, will move about
kanyāyā:-eka-śeṣa:	a maiden's one last solitary
valaya iva vibho	bangle like, O Lord!
varjitāni-unya-ghoṣa:	debarred and without noises (from contacts with the worldly objects)
tvat-citta:	in Thee, my mind
na-avabudhyai param-	may not know anything beyond
iṣu-kṛt-iva	like the arrow maker
kṣmābhṛta-āyāna-ghoṣaṃ	by the king's approaching, announcement
geheṣu-anya-praṇīteṣu-	in the houses by others made
ahi:-iva nivasāni-	like the snake, may I live
unduro:-mandireṣu	in the rat's hole (houses)
Devoid of sense of honour and dishonour, I will live very happily like a child, unaccompanied and all alone, like a solitary bangle on a maiden's wrist, I will move about restricting myself from all other noises of contacts and conflicts. May my mind be absorbed in Thee and not know anything beyond that, like the arrow maker who does not know the announcement of the king's coming. May I live in houses made by others, and so be not attached to any house, like the snake who lives in the holes made by rats.
tvayyeva tvatkṛtaṃ tvaṃ kṣapayasi jagadityūrṇanābhāt pratīyāṃ
tvaccintā tvatsvarūpaṃ kuruta iti dṛḍhaṃ śikṣaye peśakārāt |
viḍbhasmātmā ca deho bhavati guruvaro yo vivekaṃ viraktiṃ
dhatte sañcintyamāno mama tu bahurujāpīḍito'yaṃ viśeṣāt ||8||
tvayi-eva tvat-kṛtaṃ	in Thee alone, created by Thee
tvaṃ kṣapayasi jagat-	Thou do absorb the Universe
iti-ūrṇanābhāt pratīyāṃ	this, from the spider I learnt
tvat-cintā tvat-svarūpaṃ	Thy meditation, Thy form
kuruta iti dṛḍhaṃ śikṣaye	confers, this firm lesson
peśakārāt	(I got) from the beetle
viḍ-bhasma-ātmā	filth and ashes containing
ca deha:-bhavati guruvara:	and the body becomes a great teacher
ya: vivekaṃ viraktiṃ dhatte	which wisdom and detachment gives
sañcintyamāna:	if pondered upon
mama tu bahu-rujā-pīḍita:-	my indeed very many diseases inflicted
ayaṃ viśeṣāt	this (body) specially (particularly)
The spider is a teacher in the sense, that, I learnt from it that the Universe created by Thee, is absorbed into Thee, by Thee alone. From the beetle I got the firm lesson that meditating on Thee confers Thy form. On careful thought I realised that though this body is a storehouse of filth and ashes, it is a great teacher, specially this body of mine. Because of it suffering from many diseases, I have been endowed with discrimination and renunciation.
hī hī me dehamohaṃ tyaja pavanapurādhīśa yatpremaheto-
rgehe vitte kalatrādiṣu ca vivaśitāstvatpadaṃ vismaranti |
so'yaṃ vahneśśuno vā paramiha parata: sāmpratañcākṣikarṇa-
tvagjihvādyā vikarṣantyavaśamata ita: ko'pi na tvatpadābje ||9||
hī hī deha mohaṃ tyaja	alas! May infatuation to my body rid me
pavanapurādhīśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
yat-prema-heto:-	because of love for which
gehe vitte kalatra-ādiṣu	in the house, wealth, wife etc.,
ca vivaśitā:-	helpless (due to attachment to them)
tvat-padaṃ vismaranti	Thy feet (we) forget
sa:-ayaṃ vahne:-śuna: vā	that this (body) for fire or dogs
param-iha parata:	(fit for) merely, in this world, in the end
sāmpratam-ca-	and even now
akṣi-karṇa-tvak-jihvā-ādyā	eyes ears skin tongue etc.
vikarṣanti-avaśam-ata:-ita:-	drag along helpless here and there
ka:-api na tvat-padābje	none also, not to Thy lotus feet
Alas! Rid me of my infatuation to my body. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Because of love for it one is helplessly attached to house, wealth, wife etc., and so we forget Thy lotus feet. In the end this body is fit only for fire or dogs. Even now, while living, it is dragged hither and thither by senses of sight hearing touch taste etc. There is none alas to take us to Thy lotus feet.
durvāro dehamoho yadi punaradhunā tarhi niśśeṣarogān
hṛtvā bhaktiṃ draḍhiṣṭhāṃ kuru tava padapaṅkeruhe paṅkajākṣa |
nūnaṃ nānābhavānte samadhigatamamuṃ muktidaṃ vipradehaṃ
kṣudre hā hanta mā mā kṣipa viṣayarase pāhi māṃ māruteśa ||10||
durvāra: deha-moha:	difficult to remove, attachment to body
yadi puna:-adhunā	if again it is now
tarhi niśśeṣa-rogān hṛtvā	then, all ailments removing
bhaktiṃ draḍhiṣṭhāṃ kuru	devotion firm confer
tava pada-paṅkaruhe	in Thy lotus feet
paṅkajākṣa	O Lotus Eyed One!
nūnaṃ nānā-bhavānte	indeed at various lives' end
samadhigatam-amuṃ	attained this
muktidam vipradehaṃ	liberation granting Brahmin body
kṣudre hā hanta	in lowly, O Alas!
mā mā kṣipa viṣaya-rase	do not throw in sensuous pleasures
pāhi māṃ māruteśa	Deign to save me O Lord of Guruvaayura!
O Lotus Eyed Lord! If obsession to body sense is unavoidable, do rid me of all my ailments and endow me with unshakable firm devotion to Thy lotus feet. This Braahmin body, which may take me to liberation, is achieved after many lives. O do not plunge it into lowly sensuous pleasures. O Lord of Guruvaayur! deign to save me.